Many of you have heard whispers and even roars
of the control over the supplement industry
becoming much tighter.
Possibly to the point where physicians
would have the sole power to prescribe such nutrients.
It's right that this information should raise alarm
for any responsible person that has invested their time
and money caring for themselves in a healthy way.
In this interview Scott Tips, a food and drug lawyer
for 23 years, gives us the skinny on the status of this
threat to our rights as consumers as well as
what we can do about it.
Let me warn you that the video is very noisy,
as we were at the gargantuan natural products expo.
Every now and then these headlines seem to
come and go from the newspapers and the magazines
that the health food industry, particularly supplements,
are going to come under the auspices of the
FDA and so forth.
And people become frightened and then
it goes away and comes back.
Can you tell us what is truly happening in terms of the FDA
gaining any sort of control over the supplement industry?
I'd be happy to.
Basically the FDA does have control over
the supplement industry.
It's just a fight over the degree of that control.
And ever since the passage of the
Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994,
which of course tells you when it was passed,
the FDA has been trying to recover powers,
arbitrary powers, that it had before then.
Prior to the passage of the act
the FDA had a lot of arbitrary power to remove or control
the dietary supplements that were on the market.
And a lot of the products that were produced
and marketed prior to 1994,
there wasn't much innovation.
There was not much innovation.
There was not much advancement
in the technology of the supplements,
or the quality of the supplements.
There wasn't much incentive
because what the FDA would do,
is it would come in and say,
you have a drug-like product,
you have a new-type product,
that needs to fall under the drug regulations,
especially if you're making these kind of claims.
So what happened is in 1990,
the allies of the FDA in Congress tried to pass a law,
and did, in fact, pass a law
that tightened down even more on supplements.
This caused a backlash amongst the American public,
of which the National Health Federation
and a number of other health freedom organizations,
as well as some of the consumer trade associations,
like the National Nutritional Foods Association.
They joined together and Congress was inundated
with so many letters.
In fact, as many letters as they'd ever gotten
since the advent of the Vietnam War,
or at least the pursuit of the Vietnam War.
It was incredible the millions and millions of letters.
And it caused them to pass,
provided a lot of impetus for FDA to pass
the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act.
And what that did,
is it did not end the FDA's regulation
of the industry or of dietary supplements.
Although, most of it's critics still keep
up that mantra, yes, it ended these,
the regulation of these supplements,
and they're unregulated and there's no
control over them.
But, in fact, what happened, is all it did,
is it removed the arbitrary power off the FDA.
To arbitrarily go in and say,
"If you don't follow what we say or do what we say,
we're gonna take you off the market,
and run you out of business."
So the FDA has always hungered
for regaining that power since then.
So these days in the media,
certainly what I would call the controlled media,
certainly influenced by the large pharmaceutical companies
and others with very vested interest,
you'll keep hearing the mantra time over time,
supplements are unregulated, supplements are unregulated.
In fact, they are not unregulated.
Right now, today, the FDA has the power to go in,
and if someone's making a misrepresentation
or selling a drug or selling a dietary supplement
that is dangerous to take it off the market,
to even imprison the people who are selling it.
And, in fact, they've done that.
And that's primarily if they're making false
claims or extraordinary claims right?
False claims or extraordinary claims as you've said.
Or if they are
selling an ingredient that is dangerous.
I mean, look what they did with Ephedra even.
Ephedra right.
I mean that's a prime example, if they don't have
regulatory power then how did they do what they
did with Ephedra?
How did they do what they did with a lot of different
ingredients, different products and particularly every
week they come out with a list of products that they've
acted against.
That they've sent letters to, they've visited.
They've even taken off the market or called for recalls of
that product and so they have a lot of power right now.
So it's actually a regulated market.
It's just not regulated to the same
extent that drugs are regulated.
But then, why should they be?
They shouldn't, they aren't dangerous products.
What about the notion of products that really
cannot be measured within the structure that
already exists?
A lot of the new products coming out with
processes that are say electromagnetic and, where you have
other elements involved in the production of it.
How does this come into play?
That's an excellent question.
Well, those type that you would,
it's a bit of a complex answer, Because the type
that fall within conventional electromagnetic energy they
would be regulated as medical devises so they would fall
within the in the Medical Devise Act of 1976.
But there is another component to what you're asking.
Those are ones that fall more within,
say oriental style of energy meridians
and more esoteric kind of new age kind of energy.
And those are not regulated by the FDA,
and unless they make drug claims.
If they say, "Doing this will cure you of cancer," then yes
the FDA and probably the FTC
will come in and take action.
Certainly the FDA if they hear about it.
And a lot of times, it's important to know,
a lot of times they hear about it through competitors.
That's one of the main ways.
Or they'll have an internet surfing day where their agents
will surf on the internet and look for key words
and they'll find it, and then they'll hunt down
those people that way.
That's another way the find their victims.
But, generally the oriental style
or the more Asian style
energy meridians, which I think is more profound anyway,
which is a very substantial healing modality.
Interestingly enough that's most likely
to be untouched by the FDA.
Interesting
Just because it's more esoteric.
So going back into the supplements,
every now and then you hear this might, that this particular
supplement might be subjected to having a prescription,
for example in the future.
Right
It might be mandated that that be delivered
only by prescription.
Whats actually happening there?
Well
Who's behind that?
That's a good question yet again.
There's a lot of,
there's two different mind sets behind it, I think.
There's the regulatory mindset of the FDA that lives to grow
in it's power, because that's how they get promotions,
that's how they get more jobs, more money and the like
is by doing the regulation.
You know, business is good if they're regulating people.
Business is not good if there's nothing to regulate.
So there's the old saying,
"If it moves tax it.
If it moves even faster regulate it."
So this is one of the things that they do.
But also behind it are competitive interests as well.
Because the up and coming market that we've seen since,
really since I first started practicing food and drug law
23, 24 years ago has been
an increase in the power and the
widespread nature of natural alternatives to the normal
allopathic mode of thinking.
The take the aspirin, take this drug that we've created,
this expensive drug with dangerous side effects.
There's been this increase in this
alternative mentality, a good mentality, by the way.
So the established interest,
see this as a threat and what
is the best way to protect themselves?
Well one way is to
just advertise more and go to head with a company and
say, "Our product is better for this reason, that reason,"
and have the consumer decide.
And the consumer votes
in the marketplace for what they prefer.
I mean, its the ultimate democracy
is really the free marketplace.
Because the consumer votes with each and every dollar that
she spends or he spends on a product.
So what you find then, is these pharmaceutical interests
these others who are threatened by this up and coming
industry, there's another way they can protect themselves.
And that is to run to the government
and to ask for protection.
So what they do, and what they've done--
What does that mean to ask for protection?
Do want me to wait for this?
No it's okay. The pastry cart.
I'm not sure when those things go by
if I should keep talking.
But what does it mean when the ask for protection?
They will go to their particular representatives
they've given a lot of money to.
When you say representatives be very specific.
Sorry, their representatives in Congress
and their U.S. Senators.
Or in Europe it might be their
representatives in parliament.
In Canada, their particular
parliamentary representatives, whom they've contributed
a lot of campaign funds to.
Or maybe they haven't and they
just have their ear for some reason.
But more likely than not,
they're one of the biggest campaign contributors you
can imagine, so of course they'll have their ear.
They go to them they say,
"Look there's a danger, we need it taken care of."
And one of the things they do,they have
advertising agencies and other people who plant these
articles in the media about how dangerous Ephedra is,
how dangerous this product is, that product, this natural
product, this homeopathic remedy and the like.
And they keep trying to sink that message
into the public conscience.
So what they do is they keep hounding
that message away through their advertising revenue power
that they have with the media.
They can get these articles in the paper
that talk about how dangerous dietary supplements--
This is proved disinformation though.
It's absolutely disinformation, in fact if you look at
the statistics, which have been done over the years,
dietary supplements are safer than food.
Dietary supplements are safer than hospitals.
Dietary supplements are safer than drugs, far and away
by any of those three things.
In fact, you're more likely,
the average American is more likely to die from a
lightening strike or a bee sting than they are
from taking a dietary supplement.
That is the fact shown by statistics
over the last 20 to 25 years.
The only thing that would be more likely or
less likely to die from is a meteor strike.
You're more likely to die from a dietary supplement
than you are from being hit by meteor.
Or jumping out an airplane and your
shoot doesn't release.
That's right, your shoot doesn't release so there you go.
But the bottom line is the dietary supplements are
extraordinarily safe, even though there is some high profile
things that happened in past, like Tryptophan back early on
when it was banned by the FDA, although they didn't ban
Perrier water and the didn't ban Tampons when had the
problem with toxic shock syndrome and the like.
But they did ban Tryptophan interestingly enough--
Interesting
because Prozac had just been released six months earlier.
when there was a big competitor to L-Trpytophan
But even L-Tryptophan was due to, that problem
was from one manufacturing defect in a genetically modified
organism in one factory in Japan.
And it was not endemic to
L-tryptophan per se, just that particular batch.
Easily cured and easily taken care of.
And yet thousands of people die from
prescription drug interactions every year.
Every year
And they're not pulled from the market.
Even from doctors mistakes every year far more than
dietary supplements.
On average, and I'm not trying to
minimize these deaths at all, any death is tragic but on
average, its fewer than five per year
for dietary supplements.
And for doctors and hospitals,
to be honest I don't recall the exact figures.
I think it's about 750,000 a year.
I was going to say something very close to that.
That's about right.
Yes I agree.
Five a year compared to 750,000.
It's incredible the difference and so.
Yet these industries, the drug industry that
plants this material with the media cannot really taken
to task.
They cannot you're right.
Mainly because there's a revolving door
kind of situation at FDA, where a lot
of the regulators there when the graduate from the FDA
retire from the FDA.
They have cushy jobs waiting for them
in the pharmaceutical industry who can afford to pay them
the kind of money that they would like to get.
And I'm not saying at all that they are on the take,
the FDA people are on the take when they're in their jobs,
there are actually a lot of very fine FDA agents that I've
dealt with over the years who are very ethical, very honest
wanting to do the right thing.
But there are also a lot who know enough
who know their next job is going to be
with the pharmaceutical industry, and they're the ones
with the big bucks.
The other thing is they just have
that mentality that it needs to be subjected,
anything needs to be subjected to 10 years of tests
and millions of dollars, hundreds of millions of dollars of
testing costs before it should be allowed
to be taken by the public.
But that's a really stupid mentality.
Here are natural substances that
we have been with for a millennia
and are very natural to our body
and are proven safe both by their track record and
both by their track record and
by the fact that,
just that there is, just naturally there is no reason
rhyme or reason why they should be a danger.
It's not like we're introducing a toxic substance that was
artificially created into our body, rather where it's a
natural product it may have been tweaked a little bit
to make it more effective,
but otherwise it's entirely natural.
So people with the regulatory mindset are trying
to apply this toxic logical model to natural products.
And instead of being safer,
it's just reducing our ability to get
natural products that would help us.
And in reducing our ability to get natural products that
would help us there actually harming people.
They're causing more deaths than they are preventing.
And that's really the bottom line.
Do you see vitamins and minerals being more
heavily regulated in the future to the point where you might
need to have a doctor's prescription
for some of these things?
Is that possible it would happen that way?
It's extremely possible and if the Codex guidelines go
through as we're seeing them on the path of going
through, then it could very well happen.
Explain what this is about.
This whole Codex issue.
Well I've been attending the Codex Alimentarius meetings
that deal with vitamin and mineral supplements.
And explain what the Codex is.
For about six years now and our organization,
National Health Federation has been following it
for 10 years.
Codex Alimentariuos Commission is a
commission that was created by the United Nations,
by their World Health Organization
and The Food and Agriculture Organization.
It was used for the purposes of creating
standardized guidelines in all areas,
not just for food supplements.
But for food additives, for, it could even be
shrimp and shellfish,
many different things.
Food labeling, infant formulas and the like.
They have some 27 at this count,
at this time about 27 different committees that operate
underneath the Codex Alimentarius Commission.
The Commission itself alternates it's meetings
in Rome and Geneva.
I went to the last meeting in Rome at which they
considered adopting the food supplement guidelines that it's
committee had just approved upon.
Which would be?
Which means that these are putting high restrictions,
very tough restrictions on vitamin and mineral supplements
much tougher than we find in the U.S.
Is this already happening in other countries?
I mean you said this was more of a global reach.
It is.
A lot of countries that don't have their own
guidelines or their own fully
enacted rules and regulations
or on the recent skids of adopting these guidelines.
And reason for that is, one they want to be competitive
in the world marketplace.
The other reason is they look to
the U.N. as being more, and the WHO and the FAO, as
being a higher authority for their own rules and regulations
particularly the third world.
What would help with your viewers to understand and
what they need to understand is that what was adopted
last fall, well excuse me the fall before,
that'd be the fall of 2004, the Codex Committee
on food supplements in Bonn, Germany
was really just a loose framework and
right now what they're putting into this framework that
would govern food supplements and what could be sold and
internationally, are the upper limits,
the maximum upper limits.
And a positive list, what they call as the positive list.
Only those vitamins and minerals supplements that
are on the list would be allowed to be sold.
How limited is this list?
Well that's the situation.
The list is not yet been created
and the upper limits have not yet been created so all that's
been adopted as we speak now in 2006,
is a framework into which they will drop the limits.
The other thing that it's important to understand,
is that we have a system, these committee meetings
that I've been attending, are really run the
engine that's driving them is the Europena Union with it's
very anti-supplement hysterical mentality,
almost paranoid mentality against supplements.
And so if they control the processes
they have in the past of setting these maximum
upper limits, then they will be set very low.
In fact the chairman of the committee is an individual named
Dr. Rolf Grossklaus, a German.
He's also a director of an institute called
The German Risk Assessment Institute
or in German the initials are BFR.
And they themselves have set some guidelines
of what they think the maximum upper limits should be.
So just to give you a flavor or what could come
down the road, they see Niacin,
vitamin B3, as having an upper limit of 17 milligrams.
That would be the maximum dosage
that would be allowed to be sold.
Vitamin B1, Thaimine, it would be 1.3 milligrams.
So for people who need these for blood pressure
or whatever they would be forced over to pharmaceuticals
because they couldn't get the proper help.
Absolutely
And that's the idea behind this?
I think so because it's eliminating the competition.
This is looping back to what you were talking about before,
what do these companies do that see this up and
coming competition?
If they don't go head to head they
run to the government and they get laws passed
that prohibit the competition.
That's why it's so dangerous to put that power
in the hands of the government,
because it can be so easily misused by
more powerful interests, than these smaller innovative
up and coming companies or
new consumer-oriented companies.
Now there's another way they could do it.
Instead of going to Congress, to the halls of Congress
and asking their representatives to do it,
they can go to unelected bureaucrats
in an international bureaucracy and have them do it.
In this case the Codex Alimentarius Commission.
That's even further removed, because they don't get elected.
These are bureaucrats like FDA type officials who are
already oriented mentally against supplements so they
already believe the disinformation they're being fed,
because they're part of the problem,
not a solution to the problem.
So what you have is a lot of FDA type bureaucrats
from different countries voting,
and even that's a misnomer, they aren't really voting.
They call it consensus, the chairman looks
around if he doesn't see or she doesn't see any
disagreement in the crowd, then that particular guideline or
portion of a guideline is adopted
and put into effect.
Couple questions following that up.
Is there a way out of this,
in terms of the companies themselves
by simply not suggesting that their product do anything
or have any particular result.
Can you sell something if you don't make
any claims as food in a pill or whatever?
Well basically yes, in the U.S. you can and certain other
countries you can't.
For example, in Denmark, you must have
a claim associated with a dietary supplement.
They require you to.
So you can't get around it that way.
But in the US, yes, you're absolutely right.
However, you could run up against another obstacle
and that is, is it a new dietary ingredient.
Since one of the problems with DSHEA is good
of law as it was, that is the Dietary Supplement Health
and Education Act, what we call DSHEA one of the problems
with it, is it set a very arbitrary kind of cut off date.
That any dietary ingredient sold after October 15, 1994,
are considered to be new dietary ingredients and must
contain FDA approval.
Not in drug-like way, an expensive, lengthy drug-like way,
but in a kind of quasi-drug like way
and the FDA has the right to demand safety evidence and all
of that for the new dietary ingredient.
So this is a new development that we are seeing
that the FDA is starting to implement,
where they will use this kind of argument to
shut down companies who have products
or who make claims that they don't like.
Second question, what can the consumer slash
voter do at this point with new codec?
These new regulations coming down the pipe.
Well they can do several things on different fronts.
One is to be what I would call persistently vocal.
That is to contact their congressman, their congress woman
their senator, senators and to tell them
that they don't like
to tell them that they don't like what the FDA is doing
at Codex, that they do not like
these laws that are attempting to be passed
to limit DSHEA and they should be
persistently vocal about it.
So when I say that, what I mean is not to send just
one letter and say I'm done and go home.
Make a phone call, send a fax,
send an email, send a letter, send another letter,
send another phone call.
And to get better informed.
So to go some of the websites that are out there
that will give them information.
Including yours?
Including ours, at the nationalhealthfederation.org.
They can go there.
There are plenty of others out there as well that
have very good information, very good useful information.
International Advocates for Health Freedom.
There's a Coalition for Health Freedom, as well,
but the NHF.com, THE and HF.com
would be another one for the health federation.
They can go there get informed.
They can even give them sample letters to send in.
They can print out and mail
in or they can do it electronically.
So old fashion activism.
Old fashion activism, to be informed,
be persistently vocal and to keep at it.
The other thing to do is to frankly not
take no as answer from their representative.
Because the usual response that we see coming back
from them is, "Oh you've been misinformed."
This is coming from the representative or the senator,
"We think this is a very nice bill
because it will protect the consumer."
That's their big mantra, protect the consumer.
Well the consumer can be protected to death.
We're in favor of health freedom.
We're in favor of the right of consumer to choose.
How is it by reducing consumer choice that
we're protected better?
We want more consumer choice,
informed consumer choice and then if some company is
truly doing wrong, then they're already,
there are already existing laws that will shut them down.
And they can be used against them.
And we encourage them to be shut down.
There are also private citizen law suits
that will shut them down.
How imminent is this potential threat to our
ability to freely choose the supplements
in the United States and abroad?
Well, it's hard to say,
because it could happen this year
or it might be 5 years from now.
It depends on the momentum and really whether
they sneak laws through like they tend to.
So what happens is a lot of these bills are pushed through
or rammed through at the last minute as Congress is
adjourning such as on Christmas Eve.
I mean they even did that with the
Federal Reserve Act in 1913 at the last
minute with everyone going home.
And that was one of the worst disasters to ever hit America.
This a favorite trick of theirs.
And then it becomes a
fait accompli that the Americans are forced to put up with.
And it's very tough to then roll this back.
Or what they did with the Patriot Act,
where they did a bill that was hundreds
of pages thick, no one had time to even read it.
Yea pulled it together in a few days literally.
Yes, well actually they had it prepared ahead of time.
No I'm teasing. Of course they did.
They had it prepared before 9/11.
But then they produced it at the last minute,
barely dry on the paper and none of
the representatives read it all the way through,
nor could they have, and yet they voted on it an passed it.
And this could happen with our ability obtain
these nutrients?
Yes most likely what will happen it will be a,
I predict a scenario as I predict like the following,
There'll be some emergency,
there'll be some dangerous thing that happens,
that they they'll blame on dietary supplements
as they did with Ephedra,
as they did with Tryptophan,
as they did even did with Ginseng,
back when they had the Korea-gate
problem in the 70s and they banned Ginseng
for a while because of that.
There will be some fake, made-up, emergency
and then they'll try to stampede Congress
and the public into supporting this.
And then they'll, not necessarily
shut down, but at least severely limit the freedoms of DSHEA
and reinstitute the arbitrary powers of the FDA.
So we need to be guarded against that
and be prepared to act on that.
But anyway to answer your question,
bottom line, I don't see that happening overnight.
There's a lot of support for DSHEA,
a lot of support for our freedoms here.
I see it being more a lengthy process of
slowly chipping away.
And there are bills in the pipe right now,
that are anti-DSHEA, anti-health freedom,
anti-consumer choice as we speak.
And there are several representatives,
in particular, Henry Waxman from Santa Monica, CA,
Susan Davis from San Diego, CA,
Dick Durbin from Illinois, who are particularly aggressive
against supplements and against consumer health freedom.
And yet these people get
reelected time after time after time, even though they
strive heartily to shut down our right to take what
we want into our own bodies.
In short, we just have to make ourselves aware
and not, I think what happens often, when you have
something large and immediate people will stand up
and respond to it, but as you say when it's subtle and they
chip away at you one, little bit of legislation at a time it
kind of goes unnoticed and people get worn down.
It does, that's absolutely right.
And then the slowly get adjusted to this idea that,
yes, maybe dietary supplements are dangerous,
when in fact, it's exactly the opposite.
And that's the message we keep getting today.
That's why I appreciate your program,
because it gets out the truth,
and people can be better informed, than reading the local
Times or whatever the newspaper is that is not quite
so vocal or quite so well informed.
So thank you.
Scott has made it his life's work to protect the rights
of the consumer, to choose how we wish to
care for ourselves.
You can find out much more about this
important topic by going to his website below.
Until next time, thanks for watching.